To begin, I’d like to make some comments on VQAs. Essentially, Variational Quantum Algorithms are a hybrid method that combines a classical optimizer with a quantum ansatz. VQCs in HEP are used to solve classification and simulation tasks. Generally, VQAs in HEP are used to efficiently track and identify new particles and find the ground state with Hamiltonians. They work in the sense that they comprise a parameterized quantum circuit (which is the ansatz) and a classical loop that optimizes the guess and narrows down the solution. However, an issue they run into is the occurrence of barren plateaus. A barren plateau is a phenomenon where the gradient of the cost function becomes exponentially small as the size of the quantum circuit increases, which severely hampers the optimization process. Specifically, as we introduce more qubits and add layers to the circuit, the parameter space becomes high-dimensional, and the quantum circuit tends to explore a vast Hilbert space. This causes the expectation values of local observables, like the cost function, to become concentrated around their mean due to the concentration of measure effect. Consequently, the cost landscape becomes nearly flat, and the gradients diminish towards zero, making it nearly impossible for classical optimizers to efficiently update the circuit parameters and find the optimal solution. The cost function is essential, as without a reliable gradient, it is impossible to find optimal parameters.

But if we resolve this by reducing expressibility, the number of qubits, or using non-random parameter initialization, VQAs are powerful in finding an optimum solution given their ability to explore a Hilbert space exponentially larger than what a classical network of the same parameter count could represent, hence the “quantum advantage.” One of the methods to fix barren plateaus is actually MAML (the quantum counterpart would be Q-MAML). It trains a learner to output optimized parameters (instead of random ones) specifically outside the barren plateau region. I’ve also noticed that when you train a model, for example, a QNN, more data sometimes makes things worse. It decreases in accuracy and reaches barren plateaus that it wasn’t in before. This is due to the generalization gap in overparameterized quantum circuits, where the model struggles to generalize from training data to unseen data. Q-MAML directly addresses this challenge by training the quantum model across multiple related tasks, enabling the parameters to quickly adapt to new tasks with minimal fine-tuning. As a result, Q-MAML helps reduce the generalisation gap and improves performance on new data, even when using complex, overparameterised circuits. This ability to promote better generalisation is another key motivator for using Q-MAML in VQA training.

Even with MAML, picking the right ansatz is essential. Depending on the number of gates, layers, and topology, an ansatz can be selected. It is an interesting idea to automate the process of searching using RL methods to find an ansatz that is structurally resistant to barren plateaus. I’ve worked on a similar automated search structure over an algebraic space to find BB codes with desirable asymmetry properties. 

Given that I’ve specifically applied for a project involving jet classification, I feel compelled to include it here. Jet data is a good fit as they are high-dimensional and complex, exactly the type of data VQAs work on. The classification of quark-initiated jets from gluon-initiated jets is a pattern recognition problem; QNNs are effective in identifying them.

Another thought worth mentioning is that the structure of the jet topology can be exploited with GNNs instead of flattening them. The idea is that the entanglement structure mirrors the graph connectivity. 

